International leaders are in Egypt for a
summit on the conflict between Israel
and Palestinian militant groups more
than 20 Prime Ministers foreign
ministers and Regional leaders are
attending the meeting in Cairo is aimed
at de-escalating the conflict and
providing humanitarian aid for civilians
in the Gaza Strip conference is being
hosted by Egyptian president Abdul fatal
CeCe well addressing the summit
president CC said Egypt condemned the
killing of innocent
civilians it expresses its bewilderment
and amazement at the solid silence
silent stance that the entire world is
actually impo embodying right now in the
midst of one of a scene in which 1.5
million people are being sieged and are
being collectively punished and are are
being forcibly displaced these are
practices that are denounced and
deplored by the International
Community well we can speak now to
journalist and Middle East analyst
Kristen hellberg who joins us from
Berlin thank you for being on DW so
leaders are already giving their
statements in Cairo did anything stand
out to you so
far I think the idea of this Summit is
really to find a United stance within
the Arab world at this point and within
the region because the leaderships of
these countries that especially the ones
that have a peace treaty with Israel
that are Egypt Jordan the United Arab
Emirates Morocco and Bahrain they are
under a growing pressure from their
populations that are Furious about
Israel's bombardment and Siege of Gaza
so they really try to come down their
own populations to prevent a spillover
to prevent unrest within their own
countries and it's just not yet the time
for an inclusive Summit that would
discuss um that would engage all parties
to the conflict Israel and the us as
well because and to discuss long-term
solutions to uh the conflict so right
now it's really about de-escalating
tensions within the region what can we
expect I think there is one point that
we could focus on maybe there might be
some positive results on the hostage
issue because we've heard yesterday that
most of the approximately 200 people
kidnapped might still be alive and we
see that the efforts to bring back home
as many hostages as possible before an
Israeli ground campaign could really
speed up we have seen the release of two
American hostages this is a sign of Hope
and it shows that the Diplomatic efforts
by catar that led uh to these concrete
results are a sign of Hope and we have
to see that all the countries that have
diplomatic ties diplomatic channels to
Hamas are present in Cairo today which
means um Egypt and Qatar and turkey so
there might be more coordination on that
issue Within These among these countries
instead of competing who has more
leverage on Hamas all right so then what
are the common ground issues that you
think the participating countries can
agree on you mentioned hostages is there
anything
else yes definitely the humanitarian Aid
that is being delivered now that has to
be um sped up and it has to be more than
what we've seen so far to get the
foreigners outside Gaza there are about
a thousand people with foreign passports
that need to be transferred to Egypt I
think all these countries from the
region ask for an end of the fighting or
at least a ceasefire to be able to
evacuate civilians to the south of Gaza
to create security zones within Gaza and
I think they all agree on the fact that
the population of G Gaza should not be
displaced um to another country for for
example Egypt because this could lead to
a second NABA the catastrophe um that
involved the displacement of more than
700,000 people when Israel was founded
in
1948 this uh this um word was used by
president pesan president Mahmud abas so
who is and I think there needs to be a
talk about a long-term solution for Gaza
with more International engagement not
leaving the responsibility alone on
Egypt because Israel we have seen
yesterday they already emphasizes that
it's not ready to play a role there
there needs to be a new security regime
but um Israel does not want to take over
responsibility for life in Gaza so who
is supposed to play that role in the
past the EU and the US have um poured a
lot of money into the Gaza Strip but
that is not enough I think for the
future there needs to be discussed an
international approach um that would
guarantee the security of Israelis and
obviously the the well-being of the
people in Gaza and to prevent a situ
situation that before led to these
Terror attacks by Hamas that was
journalist and Middle East analyst
Kristen hellberg thank you so much for
your
insights my
pleasure